consolidated cash flows for the financial year 2019. Furthermore, in our opinion, 
Management's review includes a true and fair account of the development in 
the operations and financial circumstances, of the results for the year and of the 
financial position of the Group and the parent company as well as a description 
of the most significant risks and elements of uncertainty facing the Group and the 
parent company.
Novo Nordisk’s Consolidated social and environmental statements have been 
prepared in accordance with the reporting principles of materiality, inclusivity and 
responsiveness of AA1000APS(2018), and social and environmental accounting 
policies. They give a true and fair account and a balanced and reasonable pres-
entation of the organisation’s social and environmental performance in accordance 
with these principles.
We recommend that the Annual Report be adopted at the Annual General 
Meeting.
Bagsværd, 5 February 2020
Registered Executive Management
Lars Fruergaard Jørgensen 
President and CEO
Karsten Munk Knudsen
CFO 
Monique Carter 
Camilla SylvestMads Krogsgaard ThomsenHenrik Wulff
Board of Directors
Helge Lund
Chair
Jeppe Christiansen
Vice chair
Brian Daniels 
Laurence DebrouxAndreas FibigSylvie Grégoire
Liz HewittMette Bøjer JensenKasim Kutay
Anne Marie KvernelandMartin MacKayThomas Rantzau
Stig Strøbæk
Novo Nordisk Annual Report 2019Novo Nordisk Annual Report 2019
87Consolidated Financial Statements – Management statement

Independent auditor's report
To the shareholders of Novo Nordisk A/S
Our opinion
In our opinion, the Consolidated Financial Statements give a true and fair view 
of the Group’s financial position at 31 December 2019 and of the results of the 
Group’s operations and cash flows for the financial year 1 January to 31 December 
2019 in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted 
by the EU and further requirements in the Danish Financial Statements Act.
Moreover, in our opinion, the Parent Company Financial Statements give a true 
and fair view of the Parent Company’s financial position at 31 December 2019 and 
of the results of the Parent Company’s operations for the financial year 1 January 
to 31 December 2019 in accordance with the Danish Financial Statements Act.
Our opinion is consistent with our Auditor’s Long-form Report to the Audit 
Committee and the Board of Directors.
What we have audited
The Consolidated Financial Statements of Novo Nordisk A/S for the financial year 
1 January to 31 December 2019, section ‘Consolidated financial statements’, 
comprise income statement and statement of comprehensive income, cash flow 
statement, balance sheet, equity statement and notes, including summary of 
significant accounting policies.
The Parent Company Financial Statements of Novo Nordisk A/S for the financial 
year 1 January to 31 December 2019, section ‘Financial Statements of the Parent 
Company’, comprise income statement, balance sheet, equity statement and 
notes, including summary of significant accounting policies.
Collectively referred to as the “Financial Statements”.
Basis for opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing 
(ISAs) and the additional requirements applicable in Denmark. Our responsibilities 
under those standards and requirements are further described in the Auditor’s 
responsibilities for the audit of the Financial Statements section of our report.  
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate 
to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We are independent of the Group in accordance with the International Ethics 
Standards Board for Accountants’ Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants 
(IESBA Code) and the additional requirements applicable in Denmark. We have 
also fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with the IESBA Code.  
To the best of our knowledge and belief, prohibited non-audit services referred to 
in Article 5(1) of Regulation (EU) No 537/2014 were not provided. 
Appointment
We were first appointed auditors of Novo Nordisk A/S in April 1982 for the financial 
year 1982. We have been reappointed annually by shareholder resolution for a total 
period of uninterrupted engagement of 38 years including the financial year 2019.
Key audit matters
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgement, were of 
most significance in our audit of the Financial Statements for 2019. These matters 
were addressed in the context of our audit of the Financial Statements as a whole, 
and in forming our opinion thereon, and we do not provide a separate opinion on 
these matters.
Key audit matterHow our audit addressed the key audit matter
Revenue recognition relating to rebates and discounts in the US business
The Group sells to various customers in the US, which can fall under certain 
commercial and government mandated contracts and reimbursement arrange-
ments, of which the most significant are Managed Care, Medicare, Medicaid and 
charge-backs to wholesalers.
These arrangements result in deductions to gross sales in arriving at net sales and 
give rise to obligations for the Group to provide customers with rebates, discounts 
and allowances, which for unsettled amounts are recognised as an accrual.
We focused on this area because rebates, discounts and allowances are complex 
and because establishing an appropriate accrual requires significant judgement 
and estimation by Management. This judgement is particularly complex in a 
US healthcare environment in which competitive pricing pressure and product 
discounting are growing trends. 
Refer to note 2.1 and note 3.7.
We obtained Management’s calculations for accruals under applicable schemes 
and assessed the significance of assumptions applied by comparing them to the 
stated commercial policies, the terms of the applicable contracts, third party data 
and historical levels of paid rebates and discounts in the US business.
We compared the assumptions to contracted prices, historical rebates, discounts, 
allowances and to current payment trends. We also considered the historical 
accuracy of the Group’s estimates in previous years. 
We formed an independent assessment of the most significant elements of the 
accrual at 31 December 2019 using third party data and compared this expecta-
tion to the actual accrual recognised.
Litigations
The pharmaceuticals industry is heavily regulated which increases inherent litiga-
tion risk and litigation and contingent liabilities may arise from product-specific 
and general legal proceedings, from guarantees, marketing practices, unethical 
behaviour or government investigations connected with the Group’s activities.
We focused on this area as the amounts involved are potentially material and 
the valuation of the provision is based on application of material judgement and 
estimation and therefore is associated with uncertainty. Accordingly, unexpected 
adverse outcomes could significantly impact the Group’s reported profit and 
financial position. 
Refer to note 3.7.
We discussed the status of significant known actual and potential litigations with 
in-house legal counsel. We have obtained and substantively tested evidence to 
support the decisions and rationale for provisions held or decisions not to recog-
nise provisions, including correspondence with external legal counsel and other 
counter-parties and considered Management’s assessment of the probability of 
defending any litigation and the reliability of estimating any provisions.
We assessed litigation history and other available evidence to assess the valuation 
and completeness of the provisions recognised by the Group. We have obtained 
confirmations from external legal counsel to confirm our understanding of 
settled and outstanding litigation and asserted claims. We evaluated significant 
adjustments to legal provisions recorded during the year to determine if they were 
indicative of management bias.
