Consolidated income statement from the effective date of acquisition and up 
to the effective date of disposal.
Translation of foreign currencies
Functional and presentation currency
Items included in the financial statements of Novo Nordisk's entities are measured 
using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity oper-
ates (functional currency). The consolidated financial statements are presented in 
Danish kroner (DKK), which is also the functional and presentation currency of the 
parent company.
Translation of transactions and balances
Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency using the 
exchange rates prevailing at the transaction dates. Foreign exchange gains and 
losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation 
at year-end exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities are recognised in the 
income statement.
Foreign currency differences arising from the translation of effective qualifying 
cash flow hedges are recognised in other comprehensive income. 
Translation of Group companies
Financial statements of foreign subsidiaries are translated into DKK at the 
exchange rates prevailing at the end of the reporting period for balance sheet 
items, and at average exchange rates for income statement items. 
All effects of exchange rate adjustments are recognised in other comprehensive 
income, i.e.:
•   The translation of foreign subsidiaries’ net assets at the beginning of the year to 
the exchange rates at the end of the reporting period.
•   The translation of foreign subsidiaries’ statements of comprehensive income at 
average to year-end exchange rates.
Novo Nordisk Annual Report 2019Novo Nordisk Annual Report 2019
Consolidated Financial Statements47

Section 2
Results for the year
2.1 Net sales and rebates
Accounting policies
Revenue from sale of goods is recognised when Novo Nordisk has transferred 
control of products sold to the buyer and it is probable that Novo Nordisk will 
collect the consideration to which it is entitled for transferring the products. 
Control of the products is transferred at a point in time, typically on delivery.
The amount of sales to be recognised is based on the consideration Novo Nordisk 
expects to receive in exchange for its goods. When sales are recognised, Novo 
Nordisk also records estimates for a variety of sales deductions, including product 
returns as well as rebates and discounts to government agencies, wholesalers, 
health insurance companies, managed healthcare organisations and retail 
customers. Sales deductions are recognised as a reduction of gross sales to arrive 
at net sales, by assessing the expected value of the sales deductions (variable 
consideration). Where contracts contain customer acceptance criteria, Novo 
Nordisk recognises sales when the acceptance criteria are satisfied.
In some markets, Novo Nordisk sells products on a sale-or-return basis. 
Where there is historical experience or a reasonably accurate estimate of future 
returns, estimated product returns are recorded as a reduction in sales.
Where shipments of new products are made on a sale-or-return basis, without 
sufficient historical experience for estimating sales returns, revenue is recorded 
based on estimated demand and acceptance rates for well-established products 
with similar market characteristics. If similar market characteristics do not exist, 
revenue is recorded when there is evidence of consumption or when the right of 
return has expired. 
Key accounting estimates of sales deductions and provisions for sales 
rebates
Sales deductions are estimated and provided for at the time the related sales are 
recorded. These estimates of unsettled rebate, discount and product return obliga-
tions require use of significant judgement, as not all conditions are known at the 
time of sale, for example total sales volume to a given customer.
The estimates are based on analyses of existing contractual obligations and histor-
ical experience. Provisions are calculated on the basis of a percentage of sales 
for each product as defined by the contracts with the various customer groups. 
Provisions for sales rebates are adjusted to actual amounts as rebates, discounts 
and returns are processed.
Novo Nordisk considers the provisions established for sales rebates to be reason-
able and appropriate based on currently available information. However, the 
actual amount of rebates and discounts may differ from the amounts estimated by 
Management as more detailed information becomes available.
Gross-to-net sales reconciliation
DKK million201920182017
Gross sales270,431230,701216,174
US Managed Care and Medicare(84,202)(65,207)(53,077)
US wholesaler charge-backs(33,772)(29,469)(28,324)
US Medicaid rebates(14,365)(11,950)(12,491)
Other US discounts and sales 
returns(8,280)(6,606)(5,771)
Non-US rebates, discounts and sales 
returns(7,791)(5,638)(4,815)
Total gross-to-net sales adjustments(148,410)(118,870)(104,478)
Net sales122,021111,831111,696
Sales discounts and sales rebates are predominantly issued in the US. As such, 
rebates amount to 71% of gross sales in the US (68% in 2018 and 64% in 2017). 
Novo Nordisk sales are impacted by exchange rate changes. For developments in 
key currencies refer to note 4.3. 
Pricing mechanisms in the US market
In the US, sales rebates are paid in connection with public healthcare insurance 
programmes, namely Medicare and Medicaid, as well as rebates to pharmacy 
benefit managers (PBMs) and managed healthcare plans. Key customers in the US 
include private payers, PBMs and government payers. PBMs and managed health-
care plans play a role in negotiating price concessions with drug manufacturers for 
both the commercial and government channels, and determine which drugs are 
covered on their formularies (or 'preferred drug lists').
US Managed Care and Medicare
For Managed Care and Medicare, rebates are offered to a number of PBMs 
and managed healthcare plans. These rebate programmes allow the customer 
to receive a rebate after attaining certain performance parameters relating to 
formulary status or pre-established market shares thresholds. Rebates are esti-
mated according to the specific terms in each agreement, historical experience, 
anticipated channel mix, growth rates and market share information. Novo 
Nordisk adjusts the provision periodically to reflect actual sales performance. 
Managed Care and Medicare rebates are generally settled around 100 days from 
the transaction date.
US wholesaler charge-backs
Wholesaler charge-backs relate to contractual arrangements between Novo 
Nordisk and indirect customers in the US whereby products are sold at contract 
prices lower than the list price originally charged to wholesalers. A wholesaler 
charge-back represents the difference between the invoice price to the wholesaler 
and the indirect customer’s contract price. Accruals are calculated for estimated 
charge-backs using a combination of factors such as historical experience, current 
wholesaler inventory levels, contract terms and the value of claims received but 
not yet processed. Wholesaler charge-backs are generally settled within 30 days of 
the liability being incurred.
US Medicaid rebates
Medicaid is a government insurance programme. Medicaid rebates have been 
estimated using a combination of historical experience, product and population 
growth, price increases, and the impact of contracting strategies. The calculation 
also involves interpretation of relevant regulations that are subject to changes in 
interpretative guidance from government authorities. Novo Nordisk adjusts the 
provision periodically to reflect actual sales performance. Medicaid rebates are 
generally settled around 150 days from the transaction date.
Other US discounts and sales returns
Other discounts are provided to wholesalers, hospitals, pharmacies, etc. They 
are usually linked to sales volume or provided as cash discounts. Accruals ar